Ref #8286. Join RTOS tutorials (#149)
micro-ROS/micro-ROS.github.io: _docs/tutorials/core/first_application_rtos/index.md

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td >Makefile</td>
    <td >Nuttx specific app build script</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">FreeRTOS</td>
    <td >app.c</td>
    <td >micro-ROS app code.</td>
    <td rowspan="2"><a href="https://github.com/micro-ROS/freertos_apps/tree/dashing/apps/ping_pong">Sample app</a></td>

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td >app-colcon.meta</td>
    <td >micro-ROS app specific colcon configuration. Detailed info <a href="https://micro-ros.github.io/docs/tutorials/core/microxrcedds_rmw_configuration/">here</a>.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="4">Zephyr</td>
    <td >src/app.c</td>
    <td >micro-ROS app code.</td>
    <td rowspan="4"><a href="https://github.com/micro-ROS/zephyr_apps/tree/dashing/apps/ping_pong">Sample app</a></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td >app-colcon.meta</td>
    <td >micro-ROS app specific colcon configuration. Detailed info <a href="https://micro-ros.github.io/docs/tutorials/core/microxrcedds_rmw_configuration/">here</a>.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>CMakeLists.txt</td>
    <td>CMake file for Zephyr app building</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td >prj.conf</td>
    <td >Zephyr specific app configuration</td>
  </tr>
</table>

> The following steps are RTOS-specific commands for creating a new app once the firmware folder is created inside `microros_ws`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following steps are RTOS-specific commands for creating a new app once the firmware folder is created inside `microros_ws`. Please refer to the table above in order to get an idea of the content that the RTOS-specific files described below needed to create your own app should contain.
```

### Nuttx

Create a new app:

```bash
# Go to app folder inside firmware
cd firmware/apps/examples

# Create your app folder and required files. Contents of these file can be found in column Sample app in table above
mkdir uros_pingpong
cd uros_pingpong
touch Kconfig
touch Makefile

> touch uros_pingpong_main.c

Reviewer: ```suggestion
touch app.c
```

permalink: /docs/tutorials/core/first_application_rtos/
---

|   RTOS   | Board Compatible  | ROS2 Version |
| :------: | ----------------- | :----------: |
|  NuttX   | Olimex-STM32-E407 |   Dashing    |
| FreeRTOS | Olimex-STM32-E407 |   Dashing    |
|  Zephyr  | Olimex-STM32-E407 |   Dashing    |

> This tutorial is an entry point for using micro-ROS in one of the supported RTOS: Nuttx, FreeRTOS, or Zephyr. The target hardware for this tutorial is the **[Olimex STM32-E407](https://www.olimex.com/Products/ARM/ST/STM32-E407/open-source-hardware)** evaluation board.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial is an entry point for using micro-ROS in one of the supported RTOSes: Nuttx, FreeRTOS, or Zephyr. The target hardware for this tutorial is the **[Olimex STM32-E407](https://www.olimex.com/Products/ARM/ST/STM32-E407/open-source-hardware)** evaluation board.
```

First of all, make sure that you have a **ROS 2** environment and the **micro-ROS build system** installed in the computer. If not, please check  [**First micro-ROS application on Linux**](../first_application_linux/) tutorial in order to learn how to start with micro-ROS.

The build system's workflow in the case of embedded systems is a four-step procedure:

> * **Create step:** downloads all required code repositories and cross-compilation toolchains for the specific hardware platform. Among these repositories, it will also download a collection of ready to use micro-ROS apps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Create step:** This step is in charge of downloading all the required code repositories and cross-compilation toolchains for the specific hardware platform. Among these repositories, it will also download a collection of ready to use micro-ROS apps.
```

> * **Configure step:** user can select in this step which app is going to be crosscompiled by the toolchain. Some other options, such as transport, agent address or port will be also selected in this step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Configure step:** In this step, the user can select which app is going to be cross-compiled by the toolchain. Some other options, such as transport, agent address or port will be also selected in this step.
```

> * **Build step:** here is where cross-compilation takes place and platform-specific binaries are generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Build step:** Here is where the cross-compilation takes place and the platform-specific binaries are generated.
```

> * **Flash step:** generated binaries are flashed onto hardware platform memory so micro-ROS app can be executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Flash step:** The binaries generated in the previous step are flashed onto the hardware platform memory, in order to allow the execution of the micro-ROS app.
```

Further information about micro-ROS build system can be found [here](https://github.com/micro-ROS/micro-ros-build/tree/dashing/micro_ros_setup)

## Required hardware

The following hardware will be used:

| Item                                                                                                              |
| ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [Olimex STM32-E407](https://www.olimex.com/Products/ARM/ST/STM32-E407/open-source-hardware)                       |
| [Olimex ARM-USB-TINY-H](https://www.olimex.com/Products/ARM/JTAG/ARM-USB-TINY-H/)                                 |
| [USB-Serial Cable Female](https://www.olimex.com/Products/Components/Cables/USB-Serial-Cable/USB-Serial-Cable-F/) |

## Step 1: Creating a new firmware workspace

> In order to accomplish the first step, a new firmware workspace can be created using the following command. The created workspace is platform and RTOS specific.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to accomplish the first step, a new firmware workspace can be created using the command:
```

```bash
# Create step
ros2 run micro_ros_setup create_firmware_ws.sh [RTOS] olimex-stm32-e407
```

> The options available here are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the created workspace is platform and RTOS specific.
The options available here are:
```

```

The options available for this configuration step are:
  - `--transport` or `-t`: `udp`, `tcp`, `serial` or any hardware-specific transport label
  - `--dev` or `-d`: agent string descriptor in a serial-like transport
  - `--ip` or `-i`: agent IP in a network-like transport
  - `--port` or `-p`: agent port in a network-like transport

At this point, in order to build your first micro-ROS application you can use one of these examples as a reference:

|  RTOS        | `[APP]`         | `[OPTIONS]`                  |                                  Configured app                                  |
| :------: | --------------- | ---------------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
|  NuttX   | `uros_pingpong` |                              | [Source](https://github.com/micro-ROS/apps/tree/dashing/examples/uros_pingpong)  |
| FreeRTOS | `ping_pong`     | `--transport serial --dev 3` | [Source](https://github.com/micro-ROS/freertos_apps/tree/dashing/apps/ping_pong) |
|  Zephyr  | `ping_pong`     | `--transport serial-usb`     |  [Source](https://github.com/micro-ROS/zephyr_apps/tree/dashing/apps/ping_pong)  |

> These reference example consist in a ping pong app where a micro-ROS node sends a ping package with a unique identifier using a publisher. The same package is received by pong subscribers (in another ROS 2 o micro-ROS node). The ping pong node will also answer to pings received from other nodes with a pong message, as elucidated by the diagram below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These reference examples consist in a ping pong app in which a micro-ROS node sends a ping package with a unique identifier using a publisher. The same package is received by pong subscribers (in another ROS 2 o micro-ROS node). The ping pong node will also answer to pings received from other nodes with a pong message, as elucidated by the diagram below:
```

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td >app-colcon.meta</td>
    <td >micro-ROS app specific colcon configuration. Detailed info <a href="https://micro-ros.github.io/docs/tutorials/core/microxrcedds_rmw_configuration/">here</a>.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>CMakeLists.txt</td>
    <td>CMake file for Zephyr app building</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td >prj.conf</td>
    <td >Zephyr specific app configuration</td>
  </tr>
</table>

The following steps are RTOS-specific commands for creating a new app once the firmware folder is created inside `microros_ws`. Please refer to the table above in order to get an idea of the content that the RTOS-specific files described below needed to create your own app should contain.

### Nuttx

Create a new app:

```bash
# Go to app folder inside firmware
cd firmware/apps/examples

# Create your app folder and required files. Contents of these file can be found in column Sample app in table above
mkdir uros_pingpong
cd uros_pingpong
touch Kconfig
touch Makefile
touch app.c
touch Make.defs
```

Create a specific configuration. We're going to start from an already existing one and modify it for our new application.

> Execute the next command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Execute the following command:
```

permalink: /docs/tutorials/core/first_application_rtos/
---

|   RTOS   | Board Compatible  | ROS2 Version |
| :------: | ----------------- | :----------: |
|  NuttX   | Olimex-STM32-E407 |   Dashing    |
| FreeRTOS | Olimex-STM32-E407 |   Dashing    |
|  Zephyr  | Olimex-STM32-E407 |   Dashing    |

> This tutorial is an entry point for using micro-ROS in one of the supported RTOS: Nuttx, FreeRTOS or Zephyr. The target hardware for this tutorial is **[Olimex STM32-E407](https://www.olimex.com/Products/ARM/ST/STM32-E407/open-source-hardware)** evaluation board.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This tutorial is an entry point for using micro-ROS in one of the supported RTOS: Nuttx, FreeRTOS, or Zephyr. The target hardware for this tutorial is the **[Olimex STM32-E407](https://www.olimex.com/Products/ARM/ST/STM32-E407/open-source-hardware)** evaluation board.
```

## Required hardware

The following hardware will be used:

| Item                                                                                                              |
| ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [Olimex STM32-E407](https://www.olimex.com/Products/ARM/ST/STM32-E407/open-source-hardware)                       |
| [Olimex ARM-USB-TINY-H](https://www.olimex.com/Products/ARM/JTAG/ARM-USB-TINY-H/)                                 |
| [USB-Serial Cable Female](https://www.olimex.com/Products/Components/Cables/USB-Serial-Cable/USB-Serial-Cable-F/) |

## Installing the micro-ROS build system

> First of all, make sure that you have a **ROS 2** installation in the computer. On the **ROS 2** installation open a command line and follow these steps:

Reviewer 2: I assume that the following section can be shortened even more. We agreed to build this tutorial on top of the 'First micro-ROS application on Linux tutorial', i.e. we assume that the reader already completed the Linux-based tutorial and thus has ROS2 and micro-ROS installed, knows the ping-pong application an so on.
I propose to add a prominent note on this assumption here. See also my overview at https://micro-ros.github.io/docs/tutorials/core/overview/

Author: Please check the new approach. Maybe the four-step workflow explanation can be also removed, let me know if so.

```bash
# Source the ROS 2 installation
source /opt/ros/$ROS_DISTRO/setup.bash

# Create a workspace and download the micro-ROS tools
mkdir microros_ws 
cd microros_ws
git clone -b $ROS_DISTRO https://github.com/micro-ROS/micro-ros-build.git src/micro-ros-build

# Update dependencies using rosdep
sudo apt update && rosdep update
rosdep install --from-path src --ignore-src -y

# Build micro-ROS tools and source them
colcon build
source install/local_setup.bash
```

> ***TIP:** if you are familiar with Docker containers, this image may be useful: [ros:dashing](https://hub.docker.com/layers/ros/library/ros/dashing/images/sha256-b796c14ea663537129897769aa6c715a851ca08dffd4875ef2ecaa31a4dbd431?context=explore)*

Reviewer 2: I propose to avoid the use of Docker here. The reader should learn all the necessary steps to create a micro-ROS application.

Author: Removed

The build system's workflow is a four-step procedure:

* **Create step:** downloads all required code repositories and cross-compilation toolchains for the specific hardware platform. Among these repositories, it will also download a collection of ready to use micro-ROS apps.
* **Configure step:** user can select in this step which app is going to be crosscompiled by the toolchain. Some other options, such as transport, agent address or port will be also selected in this step.
* **Build step:** here is where cross-compilation takes place and platform-specific binaries are generated.
* **Flash step:** generated binaries are flashed onto hardware platform memory so micro-ROS app can be executed.

Further information about micro-ROS build system can be found [here](https://github.com/micro-ROS/micro-ros-build/tree/dashing/micro_ros_setup)

## Creating a new firmware workspace

In order to accomplish the first step, a new firmware workspace can be created using the following command. The created workspace is platform and RTOS specific.

```bash
# Create step
ros2 run micro_ros_setup create_firmware_ws.sh [RTOS] olimex-stm32-e407
```

> Available options here are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The options available here are:
```

> |          | RTOS       |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| RTOS | `[RTOS]` |
```

| :------: | ---------- |
|  NuttX   | `nuttx`    |
| FreeRTOS | `freertos` |
|  Zephyr  | `zephyr`   |

> Once the command finished, a folder named `firmware` must be present in your workspace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the command is executed, a folder named `firmware` must be present in your workspace.
```

## Configuring the firmware

The configuration step will set up the main micro-ROS options and will select the required application. It can be executed with the following command:

```bash
# Configure step
ros2 run micro_ros_setup configure_firmware.sh [APP] [OPTIONS]
```

> Ooptions available at this configuration step are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The options available for this configuration step are:
```

  - `--transport` or `-t`: `udp`, `tcp`, `serial` or any hardware-specific transport label
  - `--dev` or `-d`: agent string descriptor in a serial-like transport
  - `--ip` or `-i`: agent IP in a network-like transport
  - `--port` or `-p`: agent port in a network-like transport

> At this point, in order to build your first micro-ROS application you can take one of these examples as reference:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, in order to build your first micro-ROS application you can use one of these examples as a reference:
```

|          | APP             | OPTIONS                      |                                  Configured app                                  |
| :------: | --------------- | ---------------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
|  NuttX   | `uros_pingpong` |                              | [Source](https://github.com/micro-ROS/apps/tree/dashing/examples/uros_pingpong)  |
| FreeRTOS | `ping_pong`     | `--transport serial --dev 3` | [Source](https://github.com/micro-ROS/freertos_apps/tree/dashing/apps/ping_pong) |
|  Zephyr  | `ping_pong`     | `--transport serial-usb`     |  [Source](https://github.com/micro-ROS/zephyr_apps/tree/dashing/apps/ping_pong)  |

> These reference example consists on a ping pong app where a micro-ROS node sends a ping package with a unique identifier using a publisher and the same package is received by pong subscribers (in another ROS 2 o micro-ROS node). Ping pong node will also answer to pings received from other nodes with a pong message:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These reference example consist in a ping pong app where a micro-ROS node sends a ping package with a unique identifier using a publisher. The same package is received by pong subscribers (in another ROS 2 o micro-ROS node). The ping pong node will also answer to pings received from other nodes with a pong message, as elucidated by the diagram below:
```

![pingpong](http://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/png/ZOwnIWGn48RxFCNFzSkoUG2vqce5jHEHi1dtWZkPa6GByNntavZY10yknMJu-ORlFwPiOjvvK-d3-M2YOR1uMKvHc93ZJafvoMML07d7h1NAE-DPWblg_na8vnwEx9OeZmzFOt1-BK7AzetJciPxCfRYVw1S0SbRLBEg1IpXPIvpUWLCmZpXIm6BS3addt7uQpu0ZQlxT1MK2r0g-7sfqbsbRrVfMrMwgbev3CDTlsqJGtJhATUmSMrMg5TKwaZUxfcttuMt7m00)

> The files contained in a micro-ROS app is slightly RTOS specific. The following table aims to clarify which files are required for creating a new app:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The files that a micro-ROS app are RTOS-dependent. The table below clarifies which files are required for creating a new app in the three RTOSes supported:
```

> 

Reviewer: Maybe here in the 'File' column you could specify the path as well, since as I can remember these files do not go all into the same folder.
Also, I remember that before you were creating a folder named my_brand_new_app, I liked that flow of the tutorial since it was taking the user by hand and explaining step by step what he should do. I think we should follow the same line of action, with the only difference that now the text that goes into the files is reference and not directly in the tutorial.

Author: Please check the new approach

> - On the menu, you need to follow the next path:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- On the menu, follow the path:
```

``Application Configuration -> Examples ``
![](imgs/nuttx_menuconfig.png)

> - This will show a list of the available applications. You need to find: ``micro-ROS Ping-Pong`` and click ``y`` to add it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A list of the available applications will appear. You need to find: ``micro-ROS Ping-Pong`` and click ``y`` to add it.
```

![](imgs/nuttx_examples.png)

> - Now push three times the key ``ESC`` to close the menu. You will be asked if you want to save the save your new configuration, and you need to click ``Yes``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Now push three times the key ``ESC`` to close the menu. You will be asked if you want to save your new configuration, and you need to click ``Yes``.
```

To save your configuration execute the following commands:

```bash
cd uros_ws/firmware/NuttX
make savedefconfig
```

> This will generate a file called ``defconfig`` inside of ``uros_ws/firmware/NuttX``. This file is a config profile with all the required configuration to run your specific configuration which includes your application.

Reviewer: This sentence is a little bit messy. Maybe we could simplify it?
```suggestion
This will generate a file called ``defconfig`` inside of ``uros_ws/firmware/NuttX``. This file is a config profile with all the configuration required to run your specific application.
```

ros2 run micro_ros_setup create_agent_ws.sh

# Build micro-ROS-Agent packages, this may take a while.
colcon build
source install/local_setup.bash
```

> Then, depending on the selected transport the board connection to the agent may differ:

Reviewer: the transport or the RTOS?

> |          | micro-ROS Client to Agent |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| RTOS | micro-ROS Client to Agent |
```

***TIP:** you can use this command to find your serial device name: `ls /dev/serial/by-id/*`*

## Test the sample micro-ROS app behaviour

Once the micro-ROS app is built and flashed, and the board is connected to a micro-ROS agent, let's check that everything is working in a new command line. 

> We are going to listen to ping topic to check whether the Ping Pong node is publishing its own pings:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are going to listen to ping topic to check whether the Ping Pong node is publishing its own ping messages:
```
